---
title: Newsletter, February 2022
shorttitle: February 2022
subtitle: pointer.CursorNameOp renamed to pointer.Cursor
---

## core gio

Elias implemented focus traversal for Gio interfaces this month. This
enables users to navigate between focusable widgets (buttons, editors,
etc) with actions like pressing tab. This single feature has a huge
impact on the ease of using Gio for entering data into form fields and
general keyboard navigation.

There were 47 commits to core since the last newsletter.

Breaking API changes by author:

Egon Elbre:

- app,io/pointer: [API] remove CursorNameOp and rename CursorName ->
Cursor.  (cdb288d1)
- io/pointer: [API] make cursor name into a byte. Add most of the
common cursors defined by different systems. (4172566a)

Non-breaking changes by author:

Elias Naur:

- cmd/gogio: bump Android target SDK to 31.  (9b2bdf6c)
- io/router: replace cursor stack with area field.  (3e18a310)
- io/router: always choose the topmost cursor among candidates. See
#373  (99bb5429)
- io/router: ensure root pointer area in deferred calls. See #372  (68544111)
- .builds: upgrade Android builds tools and SDK.  (2b0898fc)
- app: replace C-to-Go handle maps with cgo.Handle.  (c0c25b77)
- app/internal/windows,app: [Windows] generalize
windows.GetPointerLong.  (95365d58)
- app: [iOS] disable fallback decorations. Before this change, the iOS
backend would not report decoration support at window creation.
(b9e8a177)
- all: replace unsafe slice operations with unsafe.Slice.  (fea2f888)
- go.*: upgrade to Go 1.17.  (af8ca964)
- .builds: upgrade to Go 1.17.7.  (09309d33)
- app: [Android] avoid a null pointer exception at initialization.
GioView.onCreateView may call methods on the imm field of GioView.
Make sure it is initialized before use. (b0838bf6)
- app: [macOS] redraw when window moves to a different monitor. The
monitor may have a different backing store scale, yet the system
doesn't redraw automatically when that happens (1fa9dd0f)
- Revert "app: [macOS] pace display link". This reverts commit
11f39582b84703c33d3aae4c1b703698a1bb4ea6 that introduced pacing of
display link callbacks. Blocking the display link callback introduced
deadlocks with code that updates the display link display. (34f10d9c)
- widget: reset focused states when disabled.  (79bfd3ad)
- widget/material: add focus and hover indicators to Clickable.  (50e35c9c)
- app: ensure Window.Invalidate redraws after delivering events.
Events such as system.CommandEvent may result in Invalidate being
called. Ensure animation state is properly updated. (f711e7ea)
- widget: treat enter and space as clicks on release, not press.  (aaf457d6)
- app,io/router: map Androids' DPAD_CENTER to a click. Mapping it to
key.NameReturn confuses widgets such as Editor that treats clicks
separate from return key presses. (21431975)
- internal/f32color: add support for light widgets to Hovered.  (2bea9a37)
- internal/f32color: extract color mixing into separate function.  (b74c9f96)
- io/router,app: add support for directional focus moves. Implement
support for up/down/right/left directional focus moves and map Android
directional pad keys to focus moves. (73eabb35)
- io/router: move focus on tab and shift+tab. See #195  (2e9df04a)
- widget,widget/material: make Clickable widgets focusable. This
change adds focus and keyboard control to Clickable widgets. They now
consider a press of the enter or return key equivalent to a click. To
keep the change simple, the focus indication is the same as the hover
indication. (cd2ade05)
- app: [Android] map numpad enter to key.NameReturn.  (eb48b459)
- widget: only ask for software keyboard once per click.  (8ff10a20)
- app: [macOS] pass key events to system before handling them. This
change solves an issue where an editor key press such as backspace
would apply before the IME had a chance to process it. (7f90f04c)
- app: [Wayland] always refresh frame pacing notification. Apparently,
a Wayland server such as Sway and River may not issue a frame pacing
callback created before a top level configure event. This change
ensures the frame pacing callback is always refreshed when animating,
regardless of the reason for the frame. (2e91edaf)
- op/clip: don't panic when stroking empty path. See #367  (773a7e48)
- widget: remove pointer area padding from Editor. Pointer padding was
introduced in bfece0bebacb5cec4fdf5682b886333e03b6549b. I don't
remember why, and its commit message doesn't say. Regardless, adding
padding outside a widget's reported dimensions doesn't seem like a
good idea (see #365), and this change removes it. (bed59024)
- widget: replace segmentIterator with simpler functions.  (41489fb7)
- widget: extract seeking logic from Editor.closestPosition. We'd like
to re-use the Editor.closestPosition seeking for segmentIterator.Next;
this change extracts the state-less logic into functions. (b7341672)
- widget: fix moveLines residual x offset calculation.  (2df3db36)
- io/key: update stale comment.  (845d35dd)

Egon Elbre:

- app: [macos] add missing cursors.  (e9e00994)
- app: [windows] add missing cursors.  (b7a42da3)

Lucas Rodrigues:

- app: [windows] fix maximized window size. Previously, the window
size was equal to the screen size. That doesn't consider the size of
the taskbar, causing the height to be bigger than the real height.
Now, the maximized state has the same behavior as windowed, since both
of them must include decorations and taskbar. (b82427d4)
- io/pointer: rename cursors to match the JavaScript DOM.  (730e0463)
- internal/gl: [js] replace Call to Bind/Invoke. Before that patch,
the Call function was used to call each JS function related to WebGL.
The Call function contains strings, which is slow on most browsers.
Now, it uses Bind on the initialization and re-use the same function,
avoiding the usage of strings. (182e7010)

Chris Waldon:

- widget: test caret coordinates. This commit adds a check that caret
coordinates never exceed the max constraints of the editor. (9b692339)
- widget: fix Editor.CaretCoords when scrolled. This commit fixes the
position returned by Editor.CaretCoords to account for the scroll
position of the editor. Without this change, the returned coordinates
can easily overflow the boundaries of the editor widget when it has
been scrolled on either axis. (a401d7aa)
- widget: fix editor's io.Seeker implementation. For some reason,
widget.Editor had a Seek method that ignored the supplied offset and
always seeked to offset zero. This made it impossible to use it like
any other io.Seeker. This commit simply honors the requested offset.
(a7afa4d6)

Pierre Curto:

- app: remove defer op in window decorate. See #361  (20d4bc21)
- widget: adjust Draggable.Pos to be relative. When dragging objects
around an area, it is easier to reason with the relative movement of
the dragged item. (42ea56ac)

Aman Karmani:
- app: [Android] handle DPAD_CENTER keycode.  (27762fdd)

## gio-x

There have been 4 commits to gio-x since the last newsletter.

Non-breaking changes:

Chris Waldon:

- component: defer modal layout. This commit alters the ModalStyle to
defer laying out the scrim and modal widget. This was always the
intended behavior, and I'm frankly unsure why I didn't do it before. I
guess I always laid out the modal layer last, and therefore didn't
notice. (729e3a0)
- explorer: allow no extensions on linux. This commit fixes a bug in
the linux backend that would fail to present a file selector if no
extensions were provided as a parameter. (d5cf750)
- component: expand ContextArea's positioning options. This commit
allows users to position a ContextArea's contextual widget at a fixed
location instead of at the location of the triggering pointer
interaction. It also allows users to provide a hint to the ContextArea
about where it is positioned within a larger layout, enabling the
ContextArea to avoid positioning its contextual widget off-screen.
(22cb65b)

Egon Elbre:

- component,richtext: update pointer.Cursor usages.  (8b9099e)

## gio-example

A couple of small changes went into the examples repository this month:

Elias Naur:

- opengl: render on app thread, not window event loop thread. Binding
a GPU context to a window surface must happen on the event thread, but
rendering doesn't. (e49702a)

Egon Elbre:

- mod: bump gioui.org and gioui.org/x.  (e051ef6)

## gioui.org

Last month, I accidentally failed to include updates to our website in
the newsletter, so here I'll detail changes to the site since the
start of the year.
At a high level, Egon has been hard at work modernizing the website
layout, and I've been updating inaccurate documentation as I find it.

Egon Elbre:

- content/doc/architecture: use ops.Reset instead of recreating.  (57881f1)
- go.mod: bump gioui dependencies.  (6556fa2)
- content/architecture/drawing: add info about clip.Stroke.  (7e2a7b1)
- content: fix toc on home.  (1a0d2c6)
- content/showcase: add example applications. This adds a showcase
section for the site. There are other modifications to support this.
(a4bf3c3)
- style: dark-mode.  (5da0fe5)
- style: add repeating bg to examples.  (2bb2345)
- content/home: simplify the content.  (ea6d728)
- files/sponsors: remove 2x size.  (1ece1b5)
- content/doc/faq: add closure information.  (3c4839b)
- content/doc/contribute: organize information.  (4d9cbcc)
- content/doc/community: page for finding help.  (f3ae1d6)
- content: use triple-quote for code. Triple-quote makes it more
consistent and easier to manage. Additionally add annotations for the
languages. (838ca06)
- template: use more common triangle.  (3ded86f)

Chris Waldon:

- content/doc/architecture: remove obsolete text about Add. The
content referred to clip.Op.Add, which is removed in favor of
Push/Pop. (308259a)
- include/files/architecture: balance ops in helpers. This commit
balances the push/pop of clip and offset operations in the helper
functions for the drawing examples. This prevents a panic when the
unbalanced operations are used in a macro. (8b0179a)
- content: add note about Java 1.8 to Android docs. Added a note to
the Android docs about having OpenJDK 1.8 installed, as gogio cannot
build APKs with more recent versions of Java. (1262ca4)
- content: fix Android SDK variable name. This commit updates the
Android install documentation to refer to ANDROID_SDK_ROOT instead of
the obsolete ANDROID_HOME. Thanks to \~u542620 for pointing this out!
(c16d2f8)

Elias Naur:

- content/doc: fix issue linking format examples.  (191f2e7)

## go-text

I'm still hard at work revising the patches that I posted last month.
Elias has considerably simplified the editor in response to seeing the
sprawling mess I wrote to integrate with it, and I think the result is
a considerably cleaner codebase all around. I'm sorry that these
changes are taking so long, but very happy with the clarity and
quality of the new code.